Document ID: 25422292

Tissue-engineered xenografts represent a promising treatment option in heart valve disease. However, inflammatory response leading to graft failure and incomplete in vitro repopulation with recipient cells remain challenging. Shock waves (SWs) were shown to modulate inflammation and to enhance re-epithelialization. We therefore aimed to investigate whether SWs could serve as a feasible adjunct to tissue engineering.

Porcine aortic pieces were decellularized using sodium deoxycholate and sodium dodecylsulphate and implanted subcutaneously into C57BL/6 mice (n = 6 per group). The treatment (shock wave therapy, SWT) group received SWs (0.1 mJ/mm(2), 500 impulses, 5 Hz) for modulation of inflammatory response directly after implantation; control animals remained untreated (CTR). Grafts were harvested 72 h and 3 weeks after implantation and analysed for inflammatory cytokines, macrophage infiltration and polarization, osteoclastic activity and calcification. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed. Endothelial cells (ECs) were treated with SWs and analysed for macrophage regulatory cytokines. In an ex vivo experimental set-up, decellularized porcine aortic valve conduits were reseeded with ECs with and without SWT (0.1 mJ/mm(2), 300 impulses, 3 Hz), fibroblasts as well as peripheral blood mononuclear cells (all human) and tested in a pulsatile flow perfusion system for cell coverage.

Treated ECs showed an increase of macrophage migration inhibitory factor and macrophage inflammatory protein 1β, whereas CD40 ligand and complement component C5/C5a were decreased. Subcutaneously implanted grafts showed increased mRNA levels of tumour necrosis factor α and interleukin 6 in the treatment group. Enhanced repopulation with recipient cells could be observed after SWT. Augmented macrophage infiltration and increased polarization towards M2 macrophages was observed in treated animals. Enhanced recruitment of osteoclastic cells in proximity to calcified tissue was found after SWT. Consequently, SWT resulted in decreased areas of calcification in treated animals. The reseeding experiment revealed that fibroblasts showed the best coverage compared with other cell types. Moreover, SW-treated ECs exhibited enhanced repopulation compared with untreated controls.