Effects of salinity and prolactin on gene transcript levels of ion transporters , ion pumps and prolactin receptors in Mozambique tilapia intestine . Euryhaline teleosts are faced with significant challenges during changes in salinity . Osmoregulatory responses to salinity changes are mediated through the neuroendocrine system which directs osmoregulatory tissues to modulate ion transport . P01236 ( PRL ) plays a major role in freshwater ( FW ) osmoregulation by promoting ion uptake in osmoregulatory tissues , including intestine . We measured mRNA expression of ion pumps , Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase α3-subunit ( NKAα3 ) and vacuolar type H(+)-ATPase A-subunit ( V-ATPase A-subunit ) ; ion transporters/channels , Na(+)/K(+)/2Cl(-) co-transporter ( Q13621 ) and cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator ( P13569 ) ; and the two PRL receptors , PRLR1 and PRLR2 in eleven intestinal segments of Mozambique tilapia ( Oreochromis mossambicus ) acclimated to FW or seawater ( SW ) . Gene expression levels of NKAα3 , V-ATPase A-subunit , and Q13621 were generally lower in middle segments of the intestine , whereas P13569 mRNA was most highly expressed in anterior intestine of FW-fish . In both FW- and SW-acclimated fish , PRLR1 was most highly expressed in the terminal segment of the intestine , whereas PRLR2 was generally most highly expressed in anterior intestinal segments . While Q13621 , NKAα3 and PRLR2 mRNA expression was higher in the intestinal segments of SW-acclimated fish , P13569 mRNA expression was higher in FW-fish ; PRLR1 and V-ATPase A-subunit mRNA expression was similar between FW- and SW-acclimated fish . Next , we characterized the effects of hypophysectomy ( Hx ) and PRL replacement on the expression of intestinal transcripts . Hypophysectomy reduced both Q13621 and P13569 expression in particular intestinal segments ; however , only Q13621 expression was restored by PRL replacement . Together , these findings describe how both acclimation salinity and PRL impact transcript levels of effectors of ion transport in tilapia intestine .