Glutamatergic ( N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor ) hypofrontality in schizophrenia : too little juice or a miswired brain ? P14416 blockade has been an obligate mechanism of action present in all medications that effectively treat positive symptoms of schizophrenia ( e.g. , delusions and hallucinations ) and have been approved by regulatory agencies since the 1950s . Blockade of 5-hydroxytryptamine(2A) receptors plays a contributory role in the actions of the second generation of antipsychotic drugs , the so-called atypical antipsychotics . Nevertheless , substantial unmet medical needs remain for the treatment of negative symptoms and cognitive dysfunction . Recognition that dissociative anesthetics block the N-methyl-D-aspartate ( DB01221 ) receptor channel has inspired a search for glutamatergic therapeutic mechanisms because ketamine and phencyclidine are known to induce psychotic-like symptoms in healthy volunteers and exacerbate the symptoms of patients with schizophrenia . Current pathophysiological theories of schizophrenia emphasize that hypofunction of DB01221 receptors at critical sites in local circuits modulate the function of a given brain region or control projections from one region to another ( e.g. , hippocampal-cortical or thalamocortical projections ) . The demonstration that a metabotropic glutamate 2/3 ( mGlu2/3 ) receptor agonist prodrug decreased both positive and negative symptoms of schizophrenia raised hopes that glutamatergic mechanisms may provide therapeutic advantages . In addition to discussing the activation of mGlu2 receptors with mGlu2/3 receptor agonists or mGlu2 receptor positive allosteric modulators ( PAMs ) , we discuss other methods that may potentially modulate circuits with hypofunctional DB01221 receptors such as glycine transporter inhibitors and mGlu5 receptor PAMs . The hope is that by modulating glutamatergic neurotransmission , the dysfunctional circuitry of the schizophrenic brain ( both local circuits and long-loop pathways ) will be improved .