Serotonin P34969 receptor is critically involved in acute and chronic inflammation of the gastrointestinal tract . BACKGROUND : Intestinal inflammation is often associated with an increased level of serotonin ( 5-HT ) , an important gastrointestinal signaling molecule involved in gut homeostasis through stimulation of specific receptors . In this study , we investigated the role of P34969 receptor ( 5-HT7R ) in the induction and development of intestinal inflammation using a mouse model of acute and chronic colitis and human patients with Crohn 's disease ( CD ) . METHODS : Acute colitis was induced through administration of dextran sodium sulfate to wild-type , 5-HT7R-deficient mice and hematopoietic bone marrow chimera . Chronic colitis was induced in interleukin 10-deficient mice . The role of 5-HT7R in gut inflammation was assessed using agonist/antagonist treatment . We investigated expression and distribution of 5-HT7R , extent of gut inflammation with magnetic resonance imaging and histological analysis , survival rate , and disease activity index . Finally , biopsies from the large intestine of patients with CD were analyzed . RESULTS : Under basal conditions , 5-HT7R is expressed both in enteric neurons and CD11c cells of the large intestine . Expression of 5-HT7R significantly increased after induction of colitis in mice and in inflamed intestinal regions of patients with CD in CD11c/ P42081 double-positive cells . Pharmacological blockade or genetic ablation of 5-HT7R resulted in increased severity of both acute and chronic dextran sodium sulfate-induced colitis , whereas receptor stimulation showed an anti-inflammatory effect . Analysis of bone marrow chimera indicated importance of 5-HT7R expressed by hematopoietic cells in intestinal inflammation . CONCLUSIONS : The 5-HT7R expressed on CD11c/ P42081 -positive myeloid cells modulates the severity of intestinal inflammation in an acute and chronic colitis and thus represents a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of inflammatory disorders such as CD .