Dynamic simulations of pathways downstream of P00533 -family , including mutations and treatments : concordance with experimental results . The pathways downstream of ErbB-family proteins are very important in BC , especially when considering treatment with onco-protein inhibitors . We studied and implemented dynamic simulations of four downstream pathways and described the fragment of the signaling network we evaluated as a Molecular Interaction Map . Our simulations , enacted using Ordinary Differential Equations , involved 242 modified species and complexes , 279 reversible reactions and 111 catalytic reactions . Mutations within a single pathway tended to be mutually exclusive ; only inhibitors acting at , or downstream ( not upstream ) , of a given mutation were active . A double alteration along two distinct pathways required the inhibition of both pathways . We started an analysis of sensitivity/robustness of our network , and we systematically introduced several individual fluctuations of total concentrations of independent molecular species . Only very few cases showed significant sensitivity . We transduced the ErbB2 over-expressing BC line , BT474 , with the P01112 ( V12 ) mutant , then treated it with ErbB-family and phosphorylated MEK ( MEKPP ) inhibitors , DB01259 and U0126 , respectively . Experimental and simulation results were highly concordant , showing statistical significance for both pathways and for two respective endpoints , i.e. phosphorylated active forms of P29323 and Akt , p one tailed = .0072 and = .0022 , respectively . Working with a complex 39 basic species signaling network region , this technology facilitates both comprehension and effective , efficient and accurate modeling and data interpretation . Dynamic network simulations we performed proved to be both practical and valuable for a posteriori comprehension of biological networks and signaling , thereby greatly facilitating handling , and thus complete exploitation , of biological data .