Epileptogenesis and reduced inward rectifier potassium current in tuberous sclerosis complex-1-deficient astrocytes . PURPOSE : Individuals with tuberous sclerosis complex ( TSC ) frequently have intractable epilepsy . To gain insights into mechanisms of epileptogenesis in TSC , we previously developed a mouse model of TSC with conditional inactivation of the Tsc1 gene in glia ( Tsc1( P14136 )CKO mice ) . These mice develop progressive seizures , suggesting that glial dysfunction may be involved in epileptogenesis in TSC . Here , we investigated the hypothesis that impairment of potassium uptake through astrocyte inward rectifier potassium ( Kir ) channels may contribute to epileptogenesis in Tsc1( P14136 )CKO mice . METHODS : Kir channel function and expression were examined in cultured Tsc1-deficient astrocytes . Kir mRNA expression was analyzed in astrocytes microdissected from neocortical sections of Tsc1( P14136 )CKO mice . Physiological assays of astrocyte Kir currents and susceptibility to epileptiform activity induced by increased extracellular potassium were further studied in situ in hippocampal slices . RESULTS : Cultured Tsc1-deficient astrocytes exhibited reduced Kir currents and decreased expression of specific Kir channel protein subunits , Kir2.1 and Kir6.1 . mRNA expression of the same Kir subunits also was reduced in astrocytes from neocortex of Tsc1( P14136 )CKO mice . By using pharmacologic modulators of signalling pathways implicated in TSC , we showed that the impairment in Kir channel function was not affected by rapamycin inhibition of the P42345 /S6K pathway , but was reversed by decreasing P24941 activity with roscovitine or retinoic acid . Last , hippocampal slices from Tsc1( P14136 )CKO mice exhibited decreased astrocytic Kir currents , as well as increased susceptibility to potassium-induced epileptiform activity . CONCLUSIONS : Impaired extracellular potassium uptake by astrocytes through Kir channels may contribute to neuronal hyperexcitability and epileptogenesis in a mouse model of TSC .