DB00435 induces apoptosis in GM- P04141 -treated eosinophils via caspase-6-dependent lamin and DNA fragmentation . Asthma is characterized by accumulation of eosinophils in the lungs and delayed apoptosis may be one mechanism leading to eosinophilia . DB00435 ( NO ) , present in inflamed lungs , has been shown to possess both anti- and proeosinophilic properties . We previously showed that NO induces apoptosis in the presence of survival prolonging cytokine P05113 in human eosinophils . In the present study , we examined the intracellular mechanisms of NO-induced apoptosis in granulocyte macrophage-colony stimulating factor ( GM- P04141 ) -treated eosinophils concentrating on the role of caspases and calpains . Eosinophils were isolated from human blood and apoptosis was determined by relative DNA fragmentation assay , morphological analysis and/or Annexin-V FITC assay . We showed that NO-donor S-nitroso-N-acetyl-d,l-penicillamine ( P60880 ) induced apoptosis in GM- P04141 -treated eosinophils . P60880 -induced DNA fragmentation was totally prevented by an inhibitor of caspase-6 ( Z-VEID-FMK ) . Decreased levels of caspase-6 proenzyme and increased amounts of cleaved lamin A/C in P60880 -treated cells indicated activation of caspase-6 . Furthermore , P60880 -induced lamin A/C and B fragmentation was totally abolished by an inhibitor of caspase-6 . According to our results , caspase-6 mediates lamin and DNA fragmentation also in spontaneously dying eosinophils . Inhibitor of calpains prevented most of DNA fragmentation related to spontaneous apoptosis but had no effect in eosinophils undergoing NO-induced apoptosis . In the present study we showed that caspase-6 is essential for the executive phase involving lamin and DNA fragmentation in both NO-induced and spontaneous eosinophil apoptosis . However , differences in the involvement of calpains suggest that the intracellular signalling in NO-induced apoptosis has specific features at the level of proteases . This study demonstrates new mechanisms for NO-induced and spontaneous apoptosis in human eosinophils .