DB00877 effects transcriptional programs in smooth muscle cells controlling proliferative and inflammatory properties . Neointima formation , the leading cause of restenosis , is caused by proliferation of coronary artery smooth muscle cells ( CASMCs ) and is associated with infiltration by monocytes . DB00877 inhibits neointima formation after stent implantation in humans . It reduces proliferation by its effects on mammalian target of rapamycin ( P42345 ) kinase . In this study , we investigated the expression of P42345 in human neointima and the effect of rapamycin on global transcriptional events controlling CASMC phenotype . In neointimal CASMCs , P42345 exhibited increased phosphorylation and was translocated to the nucleus compared with control . Comparative gene expression analysis of CASMCs treated with rapamycin ( 100 ng/ml ) revealed down-regulation of the transcription factor Q01094 , a key regulator of G(1)/S-phase entry , and of various retinoblastoma protein/ Q01094 -regulated genes . In addition , we found changes in the expression of genes associated with replication , apoptosis , and extracellular matrix formation . Furthermore , rapamycin decreased the gene expression of endothelial monocyte-activating polypeptide-II ( EMAP-II ) . This decrease of EMAP-II expression was reflected in a reduced adhesiveness of CASMCs for monocytic cells . Addition of EMAP-II counteracted the antiadhesive effect of rapamycin . Therefore , EMAP-II may comprise a mechanism of rapamycin-mediated reduction of the proinflammatory activation of CASMCs . The effects reported here of rapamycin on the down-regulation of genes involved in cell cycle progression , apoptosis , proliferation , and extracellular matrix formation in CASMCs provide an explanation of how rapamycin reduces CASMC proliferation . In addition , rapamycin may contribute to a reduction of inflammatory responses by reducing the adhesiveness of CASMC , a mechanism suggested to be mediated by the production and release of EMAP II .