Carbacyclin induces carnitine palmitoyltransferase-1 in cardiomyocytes via peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor ( Q07869 ) delta independent of the IP receptor signaling pathway . DB01240 ( DB01240 ) and its analogues exert cardioprotective effects via the rhodopsin type membrane P43119 , IP . Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor ( Q07869 ) delta is a nuclear receptor abundantly expressed in cardiomyocytes and plays a pivotal role in maintaining constitutive mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation ( FAO ) . Recently , a novel signaling pathway of DB01240 via PPARdelta has been demonstrated in non-cardiac tissues . We therefore examined whether carbacyclin ( cPGI2 ) , a DB01240 analogue , up-regulates transcriptional expression of carnitine palmitoyltransferase-1 ( CPT-1 ) , the rate-limiting enzyme in mitochondrial FAO , via PPARdelta in cardiomyocytes . Intraperitoneal injection of cPGI2 increased CPT-1 mRNA expression in murine hearts . Transcriptional activity was evaluated by Q07869 responsive element ( PPRE ) -luciferase reporter gene assay in cultured neonatal rat cardiomyocytes . CPT-1 mRNA expression and PPRE promoter activity were significantly increased by cPGI2 in a concentration-dependent manner , where PPRE has been mapped to the promoter region of the CPT-1 gene . Moreover , the elevation of CPT-1 mRNA expression and PPRE promoter activity by cPGI2 was not abolished by H-89 , a potent protein kinase A inhibitor , but was significantly inhibited in cardiomyocytes over-expressing a dominant-negative type of PPARdelta . Furthermore , electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrated that binding of PPARdelta to PPRE in the CPT-1 gene promoter is enhanced in response to cPGI2 stimulation . In addition , down-regulation of CPT-1 mRNA expression in cardiomyocytes subjected to hypoxia was attenuated by cPGI2 . These results indicate that cPGI2 induces CPT-1 mRNA expression through PPARdelta , independent of the IP receptor signaling pathway , suggesting a possibility that cPGI2 modulates cardiac energy metabolism by activating FAO via PPARdelta .