Accelerated intoxication of GABAergic synapses by botulinum neurotoxin A disinhibits stem cell-derived neuron networks prior to network silencing . Botulinum neurotoxins ( BoNTs ) are extremely potent toxins that specifically cleave SNARE proteins in peripheral synapses , preventing neurotransmitter release . Neuronal responses to BoNT intoxication are traditionally studied by quantifying SNARE protein cleavage in vitro or monitoring physiological paralysis in vivo . Consequently , the dynamic effects of intoxication on synaptic behaviors are not well-understood . We have reported that mouse embryonic stem cell-derived neurons ( ESNs ) are highly sensitive to BoNT based on molecular readouts of intoxication . Here we study the time-dependent changes in synapse- and network-level behaviors following addition of DB00083 to spontaneously active networks of glutamatergic and GABAergic ESNs . Whole-cell patch-clamp recordings indicated that DB00083 rapidly blocked synaptic neurotransmission , confirming that ESNs replicate the functional pathophysiology responsible for clinical botulism . Quantitation of spontaneous neurotransmission in pharmacologically isolated synapses revealed accelerated silencing of GABAergic synapses compared to glutamatergic synapses , which was consistent with the selective accumulation of cleaved P60880 at Q99259 (+) pre-synaptic terminals at early timepoints . Different latencies of intoxication resulted in complex network responses to DB00083 addition , involving rapid disinhibition of stochastic firing followed by network silencing . Synaptic activity was found to be highly sensitive to P60880 cleavage , reflecting the functional consequences of the localized cleavage of the small subpopulation of P60880 that is engaged in neurotransmitter release in the nerve terminal . Collectively these findings illustrate that use of synaptic function assays in networked neurons cultures offers a novel and highly sensitive approach for mechanistic studies of toxin:neuron interactions and synaptic responses to BoNT .