Second generation sequencing of the mesothelioma tumor genome . The current paradigm for elucidating the molecular etiology of cancers relies on the interrogation of small numbers of genes , which limits the scope of investigation . Emerging second-generation massively parallel DNA sequencing technologies have enabled more precise definition of the cancer genome on a global scale . We examined the genome of a human primary malignant pleural mesothelioma ( MPM ) tumor and matched normal tissue by using a combination of sequencing-by-synthesis and pyrosequencing methodologies to a 9.6X depth of coverage . Read density analysis uncovered significant aneuploidy and numerous rearrangements . Method-dependent informatics rules , which combined the results of different sequencing platforms , were developed to identify and validate candidate mutations of multiple types . Many more tumor-specific rearrangements than point mutations were uncovered at this depth of sequencing , resulting in novel , large-scale , inter- and intra-chromosomal deletions , inversions , and translocations . Nearly all candidate point mutations appeared to be previously unknown SNPs . Thirty tumor-specific fusions/translocations were independently validated with PCR and Sanger sequencing . Of these , 15 represented disrupted gene-encoding regions , including kinases , transcription factors , and growth factors . One large deletion in Q8N608 resulted in altered transcription and expression of Q8N608 transcripts in a set of 53 additional MPM tumors correlated with survival . Additionally , three point mutations were observed in the coding regions of Q9C056 , a transcription regulator , and Q6P4R8 , a DNA-binding protein involved in modulating P19838 . Several regions containing genes such as Q9H0N5 and P00374 , which are involved in growth factor signaling and nucleotide synthesis , respectively , were selectively amplified in the tumor . Second-generation sequencing uncovered all types of mutations in this MPM tumor , with DNA rearrangements representing the dominant type .