A p53 axis regulates B cell receptor-triggered , innate immune system-driven B cell clonal expansion . Resting mature human B cells undergo a dynamic process of clonal expansion , followed by clonal contraction , during an in vitro response to surrogate C3d-coated Ag and innate immune system cytokines , P05112 and Q9Y275 . In this study , we explore the mechanism for clonal contraction through following the time- and division-influenced expression of several pro- and anti-apoptotic proteins within CFSE-labeled cultures . Several findings , involving both human and mouse B cells , show that a mitochondria-dependent apoptotic pathway involving p53 contributes to the high activation-induced cell death ( AICD ) susceptibility of replicating blasts . Activated B cell clones exhibit elevated p53 protein and elevated mRNA/protein of proapoptotic molecules known to be under direct p53 transcriptional control , Bax , Bad , Puma , Bid , and procaspase 6 , accompanied by reduced anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 . Under these conditions , Bim levels were not increased . The finding that full-length Bid protein significantly declines in AICD-susceptible replicating blasts , whereas Bid mRNA does not , suggests that Bid is actively cleaved to short-lived , proapoptotic truncated Bid . AICD was diminished , albeit not eliminated , by p53 small interfering RNA transfection , genetic deletion of p53 , or Bcl-2 overexpression . DNA damage is a likely trigger for p53-dependent AICD because susceptible lymphoblasts expressed significantly elevated levels of both phosphorylated ataxia telangiectasia mutated- DB00133 (1980) and phospho- P16104 - DB00133 (139) . Deficiency in activation-induced cytosine deaminase diminishes but does not ablate murine B cell AICD , indicating that activation-induced cytosine deaminase-induced DNA damage is only in part responsible . Evidence for p53-influenced AICD during this route of T cell-independent clonal expansion raises the possibility that progeny bearing p53 mutations might undergo positive selection in peripherally inflamed tissues with elevated levels of P05112 and Q9Y275 .