Skin toxicity evaluation protocol with panitumumab ( Q8NFP0 ) , a phase II , open-label , randomized trial evaluating the impact of a pre-Emptive Skin treatment regimen on skin toxicities and quality of life in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer . PURPOSE : DB01269 , a fully human monoclonal antibody targeting the epidermal growth factor receptor ( P00533 ) , is approved in the United States and Europe for the treatment of refractory metastatic colorectal cancer ( mCRC ) . Skin toxicities are the most common adverse events with P00533 inhibitors . This is the first study designed to examine differences between pre-emptive and reactive skin treatment for specific skin toxicities in patients with mCRC for any P00533 inhibitor . PATIENTS AND METHODS : Patients receiving panitumumab-containing therapy were randomly assigned 1:1 to pre-emptive or reactive treatment ( after skin toxicity developed ) . Pre-emptive treatment included use of skin moisturizers , sunscreen , topical steroid , and doxycycline . The primary end point of the study was the incidence of protocol-specified > or= grade 2 skin toxicities during the 6-week skin treatment period . Quality of life ( QOL ) was assessed with the Dermatology Life Quality Index ( DLQI ) . RESULTS : Of 95 enrolled patients , 48 received pre-emptive treatment , and 47 received reactive treatment . The incidence of protocol-specified > or= grade 2 skin toxicities during the 6-week skin treatment period was 29 % and 62 % for the pre-emptive and reactive groups , respectively . Mean DLQI score change from baseline to week 3 was 1.3 points and 4.2 points in the pre-emptive and reactive groups , respectively . CONCLUSION : The pre-emptive skin treatment regimen was well tolerated . The incidence of specific > or= grade 2 skin toxicities during the 6-week skin treatment period was reduced by more than 50 % in the pre-emptive group compared with the reactive group . Patients in the pre-emptive group reported less QOL impairment than patients in the reactive group .